Updated SET workflow (#886)
mattermost/mattermost-handbook: operations/research-and-development/engineering/team/README.md

# Sustained Engineering

The Sustained Engineering Team \(SET\) is responsible for improving and maintaining quality of  Mattermost products, as well as helping support with any issues they require engineering support with. Often, people in SET primarily play the role of first responders, then handing off to whichever engineering team best equipped to resolve an issue.

## Team Members

> SET is a rotating team that is comprised of engineers from the different engineering teams. The rotation is on a weekly cycle for engineers, and two-week cycle for leads.

Reviewer: It is also a two week rotation usually, at least as far as SET goes. For incident reponse it is also a two week rotation but on a different position each week (backup -> primary), we probably want to clarify that so people don't think they only have to be a week in SET

Who is currently on SET can be seen in the header of the [~Sustained Engineering](https://community.mattermost.com/core/channels/sustained-engineering) channel.

> Engineering teams will commit a total of 4 engineers (two primaries for two time zones, two backups for two timezones) plus a lead to SET for each rotation. While on SET, that engineer should attend their feature team's sprint planning, but it should be taken into account that any urgent SET-related issue may take them out of the regular day-to-day planned work. How this is managed is up to the SET team member's engineering lead, some let them work on regular sprint work and accept the interruptions, others let them focus on fixing bugs to reduce the cost of context switching.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Engineering teams will commit a total of 4 engineers (a primary and a backup for each of the two shifts) plus a lead to SET for each rotation. While on SET, an engineer still attends their team's meetings, but it should be taken into account that any SET-related issue may take them out of the regular day-to-day planned work. How this is managed is up to the engineering lead from the engineer's team, e.g.: some work on regular sprint work and accept the interruptions, others focus on fixing bugs to reduce the cost of context switching.
```

Engineering teams will commit a total of 4 engineers (a primary and a backup for each of the two shifts) plus a lead to SET for each rotation. While on SET, an engineer still attends their team's meetings, but it should be taken into account that any SET-related issue may take them out of the regular day-to-day planned work. How this is managed is up to the engineering lead from the engineer's team, e.g.: some work on regular sprint work and accept the interruptions, others focus on fixing bugs to reduce the cost of context switching.

## Roles

The **SET Lead** is one of the engineering team's Engineering Leads. The SET lead, leads the SET team during its rotation. In practice this means the SET lead:

1. Ensures that raised issues are being addressed.
2. Communicates the status of ongoing issues appropriately to stakeholders.
3. Is a point of escalation in case stakeholders do not know who else to escalate to.

The SET Lead is also on call (via OpsGenie), and is escalated to whenever neither the SET primary nor SET backup acknowledge an issue in the appropriate time.

> The **SET Primary** is an engineer from one of the engineering teams. The SET Primary is the first person to respond to any issues escalated. Escalation primarilly happens through the "Sustained Engineering" channel or OpsGenie in cases of time urgency (refer to [Sources of scalations](#Sources-of-escalations) section for more details).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The **SET Primary** is an engineer from one of the engineering teams. The SET Primary is the first person to respond to any issues escalated. Escalation primarily happens through the "Sustained Engineering" channel or OpsGenie in cases of time urgency (refer to [Sources of escalations](#Sources-of-escalations) section for more details).
```

The SET Lead is also on call \(via OpsGenie\), and is escalated to whenever neither the SET primary nor SET backup acknowledge an issue in the appropriate time.

> We use a Mattermost Playbook to run the SET cycle. For this, the SET Lead creates a new run of the [SET Cycle](https://community-daily.mattermost.com/playbooks/playbooks/w36ro78cgj8qtjq5mf6say7bxe/preview) playbook and follows the steps as codified by the playbook.

Reviewer: I'd add a separate section for leads, later on and add this info. I'd also go over a bit of what the playbook does so people know beforehand on their first time being a SET lead.

If we do this section I'd also add 
- the name of the playbook's run is going to be the name of the channel and give a template so people don't even have to think about it.
- make them notice that the playbook has to be run twice, one for each week on rotation, not only the first week.
- I'd copy the playbook's template for the channel in there as copying from the playbook is hard (clicking in it tends to collapse the item)

> The **SET Primary** is usually an engineer from one of the engineering teams. The SET Primary is the first person to respond to any issues escalated. Escalation primarilly happens through the "Sustained Engineering" channel or OpsGenie in cases of time urgency.

Reviewer: ```
The **SET Primary** is usually an engineer from one of the engineering teams. 
```
Are there other options? if so, we should list them. If there aren't any other options, then we should remove `usually`.

```suggestion
The **SET Primary** is usually an engineer from one of the engineering teams. The SET Primary is the first person to respond to any issues escalated. Escalation primarilly happens through the "Sustained Engineering" channel or OpsGenie in cases of time urgency (refer to [Sources of scalations](#Sources-of-escalations) section for more details).
```

Hopefully the link to the title works, I'm not sure I used the right syntax for it.

> The **SET Backup** is usually an engineer from one of the engineering teams. In the case that the SET Primary is not available or unresponsive, the SET backup temporarily takes over. In certain situations it may also be required for the primary to ask for help to the backup.

Reviewer: same problem with `usually` as above.

I'd also add that they are still expected to work on tickets from SET's board.

3. The [~Sustained Engineering](https://community-daily.mattermost.com/core/channels/sustained-engineering) channel. Support may use this channel to ask questions or raise urgent issues.
4. The [~Ask R&D](https://community-daily.mattermost.com/core/channels/ask-r-and-d) channel. This is the place where support and community can ask any type of R&D related questions.

When a new issue is raised, it is the SET primary's duty to:

> 1. Understand the customer impact and priority of the issue (if required with the help of the SET lead, or relevant product managers). If the issue is really a feature request or low-urgency bug, a JIRA ticket is filed and assigned to the appropriate team. In that case, the SET responsibilities end here. In case of higher-impact issues, the steps continue:

Reviewer 2: Should we add specific criteria for what's an incident and what's a low-urgency bug? In the [incident response process doc](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1-AWQJQelgKvGVSP6sOIi9EOSVjxXVlJlwNuJlkcXKGA/edit#bookmark=id.4yjoevfvyytr) we have some criteria defined via severity but they're pretty cloud focused.

Author: I discussed this a bit with Sven, and I think adopting the same severity levels as support uses may make a lot of sense: https://mattermost.com/support/ I think we can also codify the steps (also around the hand-off) in a playbook, will work on that as well.

2. Investigate to understand the source of the issue.

> 3. Prepare a "hand-off package" including (where relevant): logs, Grafana snapshots, and above all a clear description of what the issue is ready to be acted on by the responsible team.

Reviewer 2: Should we template this out some more so that what's in the "hand-off package" is fairly prescribed so it's very clear what the person on SET needs to gather and how they should format it?

Author: Added

> 4. Hand-off the issue to the team who owns the problematic part of the product. Of course, if the issue is in the scope of expertise of the SET engineers, they handle the issue themselves.

Reviewer 2: Maybe we should be more specific here too. What does "hand off" actually mean? Are they adding the person to an incident channel? Are they just sending a message to the lead of the team?

What exactly is being handed off? The ownership and communication responsibilities of the incident or just the investigation and fix part?

I think the prescribed we can be the better since receiving any escalation will be a fairly stressful situation for a lot of people. Clear steps for them to follow might make it easier on them and create more consistency.

Author: True, I'll clarify this with some of the people who often get such hand-offs to make sure we define what they need.

   * Be helpful with training/knowledge sharing for the support team.
   * Identify customer support requests that are features and route to PM as necessary.
3. General bug fixes
   * Pick up any bugs in triage.
   * Work on bugs in this order: hotfix, release, customer reported, other.
4. [~Ask R&D](https://community-daily.mattermost.com/core/channels/ask-r-and-d) channel — this channel should be monitored, but checking it once or twice per day is sufficient.

## Sources of escalations

Work for SET comes from various sources:

> 1. OpsGenie: Support has an e-mail address they will send urgent escalations to. These result in pages in OpsDuty, first sent to the SET Primary, then to SET Back-up and ultimately to the SET Lead when not timely acknowledged. **Note:** using this channel of escalation is exceedingly rare, and only happens in extremely time senstive cases.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
1. OpsGenie: Support has an e-mail address they will send urgent escalations to. These result in pages in OpsGenie, first sent to the SET Primary, then to SET Back-up and ultimately to the SET Lead when not timely acknowledged. **Note:** using this channel of escalation is exceedingly rare, and only happens in extremely time sensitive cases.
```

2. The [~Sustained Engineering](https://community-daily.mattermost.com/core/channels/sustained-engineering) channel. Support may use this channel to ask questions or raise urgent issues.
3. The SET [Kanban JIRA board](https://mattermost.atlassian.net/secure/RapidBoard.jspa?rapidView=33). Tickets in the TO DO column should be organized from highest priority to lowest priority, based on the [Priority of Work](./#priority-of-work) section. The SET lead should make sure that the tickets are priority ordered but team members can move tickets around to meet the correct priorities as necessary. If tickets get stuck in a certain state, it's also the SET responsibility to push them to completion, either by nudging people or taking them over.
4. The [~Ask R&D](https://community-daily.mattermost.com/core/channels/ask-r-and-d) channel. This is the place where support and community can ask any type of R&D related questions.

> ## SET Weekly Cycle

Reviewer 2: Should this be "fortnightly" since a cycle is two weeks?

Author: It's not really, the SET team setup changes weekly, just the lead remains the same.

We use a Mattermost Playbook to run the SET cycle. For this, the SET Lead creates a new run of the [SET Cycle](https://community-daily.mattermost.com/playbooks/playbooks/w36ro78cgj8qtjq5mf6say7bxe/preview) playbook and follows the steps as codified by the playbook. Overall a SET cycles consists of three phases:

> 1. Start: review all ongoing issues and make sure they have appropriate owners in the current SET team.
> 2. Monitor: Monitor the sources of SET escalations (previous section) and act accordingly (see next section)
> 3. Hand-over: by Friday end of day, the SET leads ensures that the next week's SET team (especially the SET Lead) is aware of ongoing issues and have sufficient context to continue the work. Specifically:
>    * Ensure that the incoming SET team is in the right incident channels (if anybody)
>    * SET JIRA tickets find new assignees in the incoming SET team
>    * Any additional knowledge (beside what's in the JIRA tickets and channels) that the incoming SET team will need to continue the work is transferred.

Reviewer 3: Some nits:
```suggestion
1. Start: Review all ongoing issues and make sure they have appropriate owners in the current SET team.
2. Monitor: Monitor the sources of SET escalations (previous section) and act accordingly (see next section).
3. Hand-over: By Friday end of day, the SET leads ensures that the next week's SET team (especially the SET Lead) is aware of ongoing issues and have sufficient context to continue the work. Specifically:
   * Ensure that the incoming SET team is in the right incident channels (if anybody).
   * SET JIRA tickets find new assignees in the incoming SET team.
   * Any additional knowledge (beside what's in the JIRA tickets and channels) that the incoming SET team will need to continue the work is transferred.
```

## Workflow
Support may ask questions in the [~Sustained Engineering](https://community-daily.mattermost.com/core/channels/sustained-engineering) channel. If these can be answered without significant time investment (up to about an hour), just answer them. If they require deeper analysis, investigation, or potential hand-off to other people or teams, follow the following steps:

1. **Create a JIRA ticket** for the issue, initially connected to the "Sustained Engineering" team, and assigned to the SET Primary and moved to _In Progress_. Ensure the ticket describes the problem clearly and is as specific as possible. For example, if Mattermost is slow specify what is slow: the server, the client, a particular request.

> 2. **Understand the customer impact and priority of the issue.** Determine the priority of the issue following [the levels specified here](https://support.mattermost.com/hc/en-us/articles/4413076086548-Mattermost-Support-service-levels-and-their-severity), clearly mark this priority in the ticket. If the issue is really a feature request or low-urgency bug, change the ticket type and reassign it to the appropriate team. In that case, the SET responsibilities end. 

Reviewer 2: Should we mention gathering more information from the support person to help do this?

Author: Sure, that seems obvious to me, but doesn't harm to make it explicit. I'll add that.

4. If the issue is of **L1 (critical) or L2 (major)** support [will have a run of the Mattermost Support Incident](https://community-daily.mattermost.com/playbooks/playbooks/bx9xnkb8upribm3wsbye1cdwtw) playbook running that SET will be invited to. Make sure that updates (using the Playbooks "Post update" feature) are posted **at least daily**.
3. **Investigate the source of the issue,** update the JIRA ticket accordingly. Ensure the following things are clearly listed in the ticket (where appropriate):
   * Mattermost version
   * Database type and version
   * Configuration used
   * Relevant logs
   * A CPU profile (in case of high-CPU usage issue)
   * A heap profile (in case of memory use)

>    * Stack trace (in case  a service gets stuck)

Reviewer 2: @agnivade is there a more specific list or any other helpful things that SET could collect before escalating?

Reviewer 2: Also @zefhemel a list of stuff to collect is great but do we need guides for people so they know how to collect this information (or get a customer to)?

Author: This is the list I got from Agniva. I think support has some docs on collecting this data somewhere, @svelle ?

Author: @agnivade sent me this in terms of commands:

```
stack trace $kill -SIGQUIT $(pgrep mattermost), $journalctl -u mattermost -n 4000 --no-pager > out.txt.
 CPU profile - curl  http://localhost:8067/debug/pprof/profile?seconds=5 -o cpu.prof
 heap profile - curl  http://localhost:8067/debug/pprof/heap -o heap.prof
```

I could include that here, but not sure support wouldn't want to keep that elsewhere?

Reviewer 4: I am coordinating with @svelle to come up with a guide to on how to collect information for the most common type of incidents. This list is okay for the handbook. :+1:

4. The [~Ask R&D](https://community-daily.mattermost.com/core/channels/ask-r-and-d) channel. This is the place where support and community can ask any type of R&D related questions.

## SET Weekly Cycle
We use a Mattermost Playbook to run the SET cycle. For this, the SET Lead creates a new run of the [SET Cycle](https://community-daily.mattermost.com/playbooks/playbooks/w36ro78cgj8qtjq5mf6say7bxe/preview) playbook and follows the steps as codified by the playbook. Overall a SET cycles consists of three phases:

1. Start: review all ongoing issues and make sure they have appropriate owners in the current SET team.
2. Monitor: Monitor the sources of SET escalations (previous section) and act accordingly (see next section)

> 3. Hand-over: by Friday end of day, make sure the next week's SET team (especially the SET Lead) is aware of ongoing issues and have sufficient context to continue the work. Specifically:

Author: @agarciamontoro what do you think about this?

Reviewer 3: That's way better, thanks! One thing I would add: who is the owner of this hand-over? Should the dev be in charge of communicating that they are leaving SET and unassigning them from the tickets? Should the lead make sure that all tickets are handed over?

Author: SET Lead I'd say, I'll add that.

>    * Pick up any bugs in triage without an obvious owning feature team.

Reviewer: I'd remove the ownership part, it might be an important bug that the team supposed to own can't handle due to the ammount of work.
```suggestion
   * Pick up any bugs in triage.
```

   * Work on bugs in this order: hotfix, release, customer reported, other.

> 4. [~Ask R&D](https://community-daily.mattermost.com/core/channels/ask-r-and-d) channel — this channel should be monitored, but checking it once or twice per day is sufficient.

Reviewer: Should we monitor other channels that community tends to use in the same way as this one? e.g.: "Contributors" and "Peer to Peer Help"

## Sources of escalations

Work for SET comes from various sources:

1. The SET [Kanban JIRA board](https://mattermost.atlassian.net/secure/RapidBoard.jspa?rapidView=33). Tickets in the TO DO column should be organized from highest priority to lowest priority, based on the [Priority of Work](./#priority-of-work) section. The SET lead should make sure that the tickets are priority ordered but team members can move tickets around to meet the correct priorities as necessary. If tickets get stuck in a certain state, it's also the SET responsibility to push them to completion, either by nudging people or taking them over.
2. OpsGenie: Support has an e-mail address they will send urgent escalations to. These result in pages in OpsDuty, first sent to the SET Primary, then to SET Back-up and ultimately to the SET Lead when not timely acknowledged.

> 3. The [~Sustained Engineering](https://community-daily.mattermost.com/core/channels/sustained-engineering) channel. Support may use this channel to ask questions or raise urgent issues.

Reviewer 3: I don't know if this is ordered by priority, but I've never had an OpsGenie alert and I've seen at least one or two posts in the channel from support during every rotation, which sometimes are left unanswered. In short: I feel like monitoring the channel is way more important than being worried about urgent alerts in OpsGenie.

Author: I just reordered them a little bit (next push). OpsGenie comes at the top, the truly time pressure items should go through that. Indeed, no such alert has happened for months, which is a good sign (or a sign that support forgot what the e-mail address is to use 😋 ). The most important thing to actively watch are the SET channel indeed.

Reviewer: I agree with @agarciamontoro , people is afraid to call it an incident and sometimes they post a message in the channel. SET should be monitoring and pushing those to incidents without much fear. Also if people have any doubts they should ask the current SET lead if it makes sense to upgrade it to an incident.

Reviewer 3: > OpsGenie comes at the top, the truly time pressure items should go through that.

I agree, but I have two problems with OpsGenie in general: I feel like I won't know what to do when (if) an alert comes in, as I've never done that, only in the 30-minute training meeting we had months (maybe a year or more?) ago when the SET on-call started. And I am not confident I'll get a notification from it (because that has never happened to me), so I'm constantly checking it just in case :tm: Those two things create a bit of stress and make me put the focus on the wrong part of the SET stack. Clarifying here that an alert from OpsGenie is rare would help, I think. 

> I agree with @agarciamontoro , people is afraid to call it an incident and sometimes they post a message in the channel. SET should be monitoring and pushing those to incidents without much fear.

Yeah, closing an unneeded incident is easy, but recovering the time lost when not opening one is hard. Creating incidents is cheap, so let's use them :)

> 4. The [~Ask R&D](https://community-daily.mattermost.com/core/channels/ask-r-and-d) channel. This is the place where support and community can ask any type of R&D related questions.

Reviewer: See my comment above about monitoring a couple of other channels.

## Workflow
When a new issue is raised, follow these steps:

> 1. **Create a JIRA ticket** for the issue, initially connected to the "Sustained Engineering" team, and assigned to the SET Primary and moved to _In Progress_. Ensure the ticket describes the problem clearly and is as specific as possible. For example, if Mattermost is slow specify what is slow: the server, the client, a particular request.

Reviewer: Maybe this should be part of the playbook, asking if there is a ticket to attach it to the run or if it isn't to create one.

Author: I'm now switching this to use the Mattermost Support Incident playbook, which include a task for this.

> 2. **Understand the customer impact and priority of the issue.** Determine the priority of the issue following [the levels specified here](https://support.mattermost.com/hc/en-us/articles/360038546151-Ticket-Priority-Guidelines), clearly mark this priority in the ticket. If the issue is really a feature request or low-urgency bug, change the ticket type and reassign it to the appropriate team. In that case, the SET responsibilities end. 

Reviewer: again, this should be part of the playbook, we don't want people to forget doing this.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
2. **Understand the customer impact and priority of the issue.** Determine the priority of the issue following [the levels specified here](https://support.mattermost.com/hc/en-us/articles/4413076086548-Mattermost-Support-service-levels-and-their-severity), clearly mark this priority in the ticket. If the issue is really a feature request or low-urgency bug, change the ticket type and reassign it to the appropriate team. In that case, the SET responsibilities end. 
```

The link to the SLA descriptions changed.

> 4. If the issue is of **L1 (critical) or L2 (major), create a run of the [SET Incident Playbook](https://community-daily.mattermost.com/playbooks/playbooks/w5qizi5kojd7jejrsfpat5dupo)** and follow the playbook. Make sure that updates (using the Playbooks "Post update" feature) are posted **at least daily**.

Reviewer: if it is not L1 or L2 (I'm not sure why are we leaving L3 out, but 0/5 on that), SET shouldn't be doing anything, right? Not sure how we got to number 4 before doing an early exit.

Author: @svelle do we have examples of L3-5 tickets that are escalated to SET? What types of issues do those tend to be?

3. **Investigate the source of the issue,** update the JIRA ticket accordingly. Ensure the following things are clearly listed in the ticket (where appropriate):
   * Mattermost version
   * Database type and version
   * Configuration used
   * Relevant logs
   * A CPU profile (in case of high-CPU usage issue)
   * A heap profile (in case of memory use)
   * Stack trace (in case  a service gets stuck)
4. Hand-over (optional): once the issue is sufficiently narrowed down _and_ there is a more appropriate owner than SET, hand the issue over as follows:
   * If a SET Incident playbook was run, follow the hand-over steps in that playbook
   * Reassign the JIRA ticket to the new owning team

> 

Reviewer: I'm missing stating what's expected from Primary once he starts the incident. He is supposed to command the incident, but what does that mean to them?
It doesn't have to be on this page, though. We could create a shorter version with the work so it can be quickly read by anyone (say an eng. is back to SET but he hasn't done this for months, what's the minimum he needs to remember the process?)
